---
layout: post
title: "Is Google making us stupid?"
date: 2014-11-20
---
Is Google making us stupid? This topic has been hotly debated among psychologists, computer scientists, concerned 
parents, and teachers since ﬁrst popularized by a 2008 article in  The Atlantic. Particularly popular among the tabloid press, worries over how computer technology and the internet are changing our minds and brains have given rise to some breathtaking headlines, most notably in The Daily Mail: "Modern technology is changing the way our brains work, says neuroscientist"; "Facebook and internet can rewire your brain and shorten attention span"; "Internet rewires our brains and makes teenagers vulnerable to mental illness"; "Too much internet use can damage teenagers' brains." Scary stuff indeed.

A more scientiﬁcally robust attempt to quantify this effect is provided by a recent study by Sparrow et al. They have 
attempted to demonstrate empirically how the "Google Effect" could impact on memory, using a series of experiments 
comparing subjects’ memories for facts when they believed the information had been recorded on a computer vs. when 
they believed it had not. The authors found strong effects showing that people remembered less when they believed 
information would be saved on a computer, that they remembered more when they believed information that they typed 
into a computer had been erased, and that if they were unsure about a piece of information they were primed to look on a
computer for the answer. Somewhat less clearly, but still signiﬁcant, was a ﬁnding that subjects may remember where a 
piece of information was stored more strongly than what the information was.

These effects show an interesting insight into how memory operates: it is more parsimonious to remember only that 
information that is not recorded elsewhere, and hence it is also important to be able to locate information that is stored later. The authors draw some strong conclusions: that the very nature of human memory is changing due to our reliance on computers, and that as this dependence increases, the loss of an internet connection will affect us like losing a friend.

What the article (and its breathless coverage in the popular press) misses is any kind of context or control condition. 
How would memory compare if items were recorded in, say, a notebook rather than a computer? Is there any reason to 
think that the effects described are unique to computers or the internet, rather than being a general feature of any kind of information storage? Are these features of memory a recent development, or have people always remembered only that information that they need? How is the availability of a large quantity of information available online any different from the same information being available in a library?

Fears over the effects of technology on our psyche are not new — every technological development is decried as poten-
tially dangerous. In 370 BC, Socrates warned of the dangers of writing: "this discovery of yours will create forgetfulness in the learners' souls, because they will not use their memories... you give your disciples not truth, but only the semblance of truth; they will be hearers of many things and will have learned nothing."
Sparrow, B., Liu, J., & Wegner, D. M. (2011). Google effects on memory: Cognitive consequences of having information at our ﬁngertips. Science, 333 (6043): 776–778.


This article originally appeared in [Neuropsychoanalysis](http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rnpa20#.VL0VXCvF98F).