---
layout: post
title: "Do video games make people violent?"
date: 2015-01-20
---
In recent years controversy about computer games has hit the news again, particularly regarding Norwegian mass-murderer Anders Breivik, who had spent a year of his life playing World of Warcraft. Newspapers have wondered if the ["secret to the Norwegian massacre"](http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/dr-raj-persaud/norwegian-massacre-computer-games_b_1430831.html) lies in his obsession with games, and some retailers even [pulled games from the shelves](http://www.arbitragemagazine.com/general/norway-retailers-pull-violent2-video-games3-shelves4-massacre/) following the events. One commentator went so far as to suggest that the fact Breivik enjoyed role-playing games showed that he [could not distinguish fantasy from reality](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/norway/9211988/Anders-Breivik-unable-to-distinguish-reality-says-professor.html). The actions of this murderer were uncontroversially despicable, and all the more shocking because they were unexpected, and it is natural to want to find reasons for his behaviour. But does it make sense to point the finger at video games?

I am reminded of the documentary Bowling for Columbine, which explored the Columbine High School massacre and the local and national reactions to the terrible school shooting. A number of people and groups suggested that as the teenage perpetrators had listened to Marilyn Mason's music, it may have that which pushed them into violence. But as Michael Moore pointed out, the teenagers had also gone bowling before taking part in the crime. No one blamed bowling for the tragedy, so why blame music?

Games, however, are unusual in that they are a highly interactive medium - people do not passively observe or absorb games, they take an active part in controlling a character. And undeniably, many popular games are bloody and could be said to glorify violence by awarding points based on the number of enemy characters which are killed. I would dispute that World of Warcraft is one of these games, though - it focuses on cooperation, strategy and communication far more than on violence. That said, I can understand why some people are concerned that controlling first-hand graphic violence in a game might effect how people behave when they are not playing.

Whether or not violent games make people more inclined to violence is not a moral question, it is an empirical one. That means that because it is a question about a causal link (does one thing cause another?), we can investigate it with a scientific approach. For example, we can take a group of people, measure their levels of aggression, have them play violent games for a few weeks, and then see if their levels of aggression have increased. However, we must be careful of confounding factors - like perhaps people are just more inclined to behave aggressively at the second measurement because they are bored of being prodded by scientists! So we need a control group - a group of similar people to the main group, who we treat in exactly the same way but who take part in another activity, such as playing non-violent games. Then we look at the difference between our gaming group and our control group. If the gaming group show an increase in aggression which is significantly larger than the control group, we can conclude that the games may be affecting aggression.

This simple principle is the basis of almost all psychology research today, and it is the way in which we could find out the effects of gaming on behaviour. Unfortunately, many studies on this topic do not follow these principles and make sensational claims based on poor evidence. Did you see the news story a while ago that [violent video games negatively alter your brain](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2067607/Violent-games-DO-alter-brain--effect-visible-MRI-scans-just-week.html)?
