---
layout: post
title: "Psychiatry beyond the current paradigm"
date: 2015-01-25
---
With the impending publication of the DSM–V and its focus on biological markers for disease, attention has turned once again to the organic basis of psychiatry. Are psychiatric conditions purely brain conditions? Can biological models explain mental health disorders? Should psychiatry be reduced to a clinical neuroscience or neurology? The attempt to rationalize psychiatry by bringing it under medical paradigms of diagnosis, faulty mechanisms, and psychopharmacological intervention has yielded mixed results, and debate continues over whether this approach continues to be useful for clinical settings.

Bracken and colleagues provide a timely critique of the medical model of mental illness, arguing that this approach is not in line with the evidence and is neglectful of other useful approaches. They label the current approach the technological paradigm, defining it as a paradigm in which mental health problems are described in terms of faulty mechanisms, which can be modeled in causal terms and are subject to technological interventions. First, they examine counterevidence for this paradigm, such as the importance of nonphysical factors in mental health outcomes, particular social support and placebo effects. Then they discuss the problem of recovery (how recovery is possible in a faulty mechanism paradigm; why some people recover from mental health conditions and others do not; how useful technological interventions are in aiding recovery). They argue that these are reasons to move away from the technological paradigm and toward more person-centered models offered by approaches such as community-based care or the service user movement.

While raising important objections to an overreliance on reductionism in psychiatry, it could be argued that the authors have set up something of a straw man here. Even the most ardent reductionist would not argue that outside factors such as social support or expectancy effects would have no bearing on someone's psychiatric outcome. The argument must be over whether these factors or underlying biological factors provide a more useful level of explanation from which to formulate treatments. If a patient is depressed, what interventions can a clinician provide to alleviate his or her suffering? Clinicians do not have the power to control such a patient's social situation, but they can prescribe drugs or psychotherapy - and the question must be: "Of the available interventions, which will be the most effective?"

Other authors have discussed the importance of social factors on mental health (McAlpine & Mechanic, 2010), including objections to the increasing medicalization of everyday life (see David, 2006). Considering the importance of expert opinion in these discussions, it may be that clinicians have a power and a duty to influence the discourse around mental health to reflect these concerns (see Kleinman, 2012). Clinicians have a vital role in forming the paradigms of mental health that are reflected in academic research, medical treatments, and public views. For clinicians to further collaborate with the service user movement, for example, would not only provide a source of new models and data regarding mental health, but also promote a view of clients as equal participants with clinicians, rather than objects of study.

The challenges facing psychiatry are serious and are deserving of serious consideration. The medical model describes just one aspect of the complex interplay of factors that influence mental health outcomes. A collaborative, interdisciplinary approach that incorporates insights from neuroscience, social psychology, and person-centered models would benefit the field, both as an academic discipline and 
in finding effective way to improve the lives of people with 
mental health issues.


Bracken, P., Thomas, P., Timimi, s., asen, e., Behr, G., Beuster, c., et al. (2012).  Psychiatry beyond the current paradigm. British Journal of Psychiatry, 201 (6): 430–434.